A poor, paranoid young student named Raskolnikov convinces himself that he is extraordinary. He develops a theory to suggest that the world’s most extraordinary men should be permitted to commit any crime in pursuit of the greater good of humanity. Raskolnikov lives in a tiny apartment, spends what little money he has on strange, altruistic causes, and plots some mysterious, terrible deed that will prove his superiority.



Finally, Raskolnikov decides to test his theory. He murders an elderly pawnbroker whom he considers a leech on society. He also murders the pawnbroker’s half-sister, who intrudes on the murder scene unexpectedly. Raskolnikov escapes the scene of the crime, but soon falls ill with a fever and spends several days unconscious in his tiny apartment. When Raskolnikov begins to recover, he learns that his sister Dunia plans to marry a pompous, wealthy man named Luzhin. Raskolnikov is furious, believing that Dunia is sacrificing her happiness on his behalf. When Luzhin comes to see Raskolnikov in Saint Petersburg, Raskolnikov erupts with anger and throws insults at his prospective brother-in-law.



Raskolnikov rises from his sick bed and sneaks out. He frantically reads the newspapers every day since the murders. When Raskolnikov runs into a police officer, he nearly confesses to the crimes—and his frantic ranting raises suspicions in the police department. Raskolnikov runs out of the police station and sees his drinking buddy, a clerk named Marmeladov, lying in the street fatally wounded by a stagecoach. Marmeladov is carried to the small apartment he shares with his family. Feeling sorry for the grieving family—particularly Marmeladov’s teenage daughter Sonia—Raskolnikov leaves behind all of his money to pay for Marmeladov’s funeral.



Raskolnikov is surprised to find his mother and sister on his doorstep. They have come to prepare for Dunia’s marriage to Luzhin. Enraged, Raskolnikov forbids his sister from marrying Luzhin.



Dunia’s former employer, a rich man named Svidrigailov, arrives in Saint Petersburg. His extramarital pursuit of Dunia caused a scandal that nearly ruined her reputation in the provinces. Now that Svidrigailov’s wife is dead, he has come to Saint Petersburg in the hopes that he can seduce Dunia.



Memories of the murders plague Raskolnikov. When he discovers that the local police magistrate Porfiry has begun to interview all of the pawnbroker’s clients, Raskolnikov requests the return of his own pawned items. His strange conversation with Porfiry only leads to more suspicion. Afterward, while preparing for Marmeladov’s funeral, Raskolnikov and Sonia prepare talk about religion and morality. Raskolnikov pities Sonia, who has been forced into prostitution by her poverty. Raskolnikov decides to tell her who murdered the two women, promising to return the next day.



Porfiry interviews Raskolnikov again. Though he is certain that Raskolnikov is the murderer, he is not yet able to provide proof. Raskolnikov visits Sonia and tells her what he did. In the room next door, Svidrigailov eavesdrops on the conversation and learns the truth. Later, Svidrigailov tries to use his knowledge of the confession to blackmail Dunia into marriage. She refuses him, accuses him of murdering his wife, and she tries to shoot him in the head. She misses, but Svidrigailov realizes that Dunia will never love him. He lets her go and, the next day, he commits suicide.



After man is arrested after falsely confessing to the murders, Porfiry visits Raskolnikov and reveals that he knows the truth. However, he wishes to give Raskolnikov time to make a sincere confession. After an anxious night and with support from Sonia, Raskolnikov visits the police station and confesses. He is sentenced to a penal colony in Siberia, where Sonia joins him. While there, he pieces his life back together.