Many of the stories center around a human child named Mowgli, who is adopted by a pack of wolves and raised as one of their own. Mowgli endures a variety of trials and tribulations as he grows up in an Indian jungle. He must learn the way of the jungle, and though he is accepted as a “wolf” by the jungle’s other animals, will eventually be faced with his own identity after coming into contact with other humans. Mowgli does not want to identify as a human because he is all too aware of what humans signify for the jungle: greed and destruction. Though the “rules” of the animal kingdom can prove savage or seemingly arbitrary, Mowgli understands that the jungle animals act according to their nature. Humans, however, are an enigma. Greed is not an inherent trait. As Mowgli faces his fears about humans, being kicked out of his wolf pack and confronting his sworn enemy, the tiger, he must come face to face with the fact that he is, despite his prejudices, human.



The Mowgli stories in the collection are supplemented by stories about animals around the British Empire, though the stories often carry the same themes. These stories usually end with verse or song lyrics recited by the main character, thus summarizing the story. Because of their marked difference from the Mowgli stories, many publishers actually separate the collection into two different volumes. Though the Mowgli stories are perhaps the most well-known of the collection, especially as they have been made into movies on several occasions, the other stories feature likeable and popular characters, including the mongoose named Rikki-Tikki-Tavi.



Of the Mowgli stories, the first short story is called “Mowgli’s Brothers.” In it, the reader is first introduced to Mowgli, a young human child who is found in the wilderness by wolves. He is subsequently raised by these wolves as one of their pack. “Kaa’s Hunting” continues with Mowgli’s adventures, focusing on Mowgli as he grows up and, like a growing child, must learn his place, and at times by trial and error. “Tiger, Tiger” reveals Mowgli’s major struggles. He is kicked out of his wolf pack due to the jealous machinations of others. He tries to fit into human society, but finds himself again faced with myriad trials. He must also face his sworn enemy, the tiger.



Picking up on similar themes of loyalty, identity and freedom that are evidenced in Mowgli’s stories, the animal fables/stories introduce new characters and trials. “The White Seal” is set in the Bering Sea, and deals with a brave seal that travels the world looking for the best place for seals. He then shares all of the knowledge he has gained from traveling the world with the other seals. “Rikki-Tikki-Tavi” tales the story of a mongoose that must, through its loyalty, protect its family in India from cobras, which are known for their deadly bites. “Toomai of the Elephants” also takes place in India, and follows a boy’s experience one night with elephants. The story centers on an elusive elephant dance, plus an elephant and his handler. Another story, “Servants of the Queen,” is set in Pakistan, and focuses on camp animals as they discuss their daily lives.



Rudyard Kipling’s collection of short stories is timeless in its approach to themes like identity and prejudice. The reader can take delight in witnessing animals reasoning in the same manner as humans. On the one hand, this comical approach helps to distance the reader from the implications on display in the daily lives of these animals. On the other hand, the approach provides a workable framework for revealing how very similar humans are to the animal kingdom, no matter how hard one tries to distance the two groups. As Mowgli must wonder: who is the real savage and who is true to its nature, in the end? Kipling presents these themes and circumstances, and then allows the reader to investigate the consequences based on humor, reason and experience.