Peter Holmes is a lieutenant commander in the Australian Navy, and Dwight Tower is the commander of a United States nuclear submarine stationed off the coast of Australia. Peter has been instructed to accompany Dwight on his final mission as a submarine commander, and he agrees to go, despite his concerns about leaving his wife, Mary, and infant daughter, Jennifer, to face the impending nuclear fall-out alone. Most reports state that the radiation will reach the southernmost reaches of the globe in about six months – the only living people left on Earth are those living in South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and some parts of South America.

Life near Melbourne is relatively normal, despite the global catastrophe. The only problem is the lack of fuel, which makes getting around in cars difficult. Peter invites Dwight to his home in Falmouth, near Melbourne, where they spend the weekend before taking an eleven-day trip around the coast of northern Australia looking for signs of life. At Peter's house, Dwight meets Moira Davis, a young woman who drinks to cope with her despair over losing the chance at the life she always imagined.



After the weekend, Peter, Dwight, and scientist Josh Osbourne, along with other crewmembers, set off on their Australia coastal cruise. On board, they discuss some of the details of the war, of which there is no written account – it is not entirely clear who fired the final bomb that destroyed the world. The crew only seems to know cursory details about the events leading up to the detonation: Albania started an Arab-Israeli war, which led to war between Russia and NATO, and finally between Russia and China. As they travel around Australia, scouting, the crew finds only one living creature – a single dog on the beach.

After returning home, Dwight and Moira become friends; Moira begins to fall in love with Dwight. Dwight, however, is loyal to his wife and children in Connecticut – despite knowing that everyone in the Northern Hemisphere is dead, Dwight pretends his family is still alive, even buying his dead children presents. Moira accepts that Dwight will remain loyal to his wife, but invites him to her family farm where he meets her parents, who are also in denial about their coming death. They are planting flowers and preparing the farm for winter, despite knowing they will be dead by the time the flowers bloom.

The crew then takes off on a submarine trip to Seattle, where a repetitive radio signal has been picked up for a number of days. They hope to investigate something called the Jorgenson effect, which states that rain and snow can clear the air of radiation, meaning that life in Australia could continue past August. Before departing, Peter instructs his wife to give their daughter a lethal injection if the radiation arrives before he returns, so she doesn't die a slow, painful death. When the crew arrives in Seattle, they use protective suits to travel on land, where they find a broken windowpane pressing a radio signal button but no signs of life.



After returning home, the crew spends time with their families and loved ones until the radiation comes. By the end of August, everyone has fallen ill from the fall-out. Each character dies by his or her own hand – some in racecars, others using injections or pills and alcohol. Commander Dwight Towers sinks his submarine in international waters, choosing to go down honorably with his ship. The book ends as Moira, watching Dwight sink his submarine from a cliff overlooking the water, takes her pill and swallows it with brandy.

Nevil Shute was born in England and spent his final years in Australia. He worked as an aeronautical engineer and wrote one to two novels a year for about twenty-five years during the height of his career. His most popular novels are A Town Like Alice and On the Beach.