"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" (often called only "Alice in Wonderland") is a children fantasy book, written in 1865. The plot has circuit structure, beginning with Alice's dream, and ending by her waking up, so we can observe all of her adventures in Wonderland as a dream.

By genre, this novel is an example of children fantasy novel, filled with fantastic elements and following the rules of the fantasy genre through the whole book.

Fantastic elements are consisted out of unusual characters, as personified playing cards or the rabbit wearing a tail-coat and a wrist watch. Besides the characters, the rabbit hole in which Alice fell is also an unusual element. The fall itself is described as especially strange and astonishing, because Alice is falling down very slowly, unaware of the passing time or distance, and she was even able to sleep for a while.

This fall can be used as a metaphor for falling into sleep, not just as a representation of a physical fall in another world. We are uncertain of the true meaning of the fall, and that is one of the main fantasy features in this novel. The author is playing with the world of illusions, giving the characters both good and bad features, describing his environment in a manner of caricature.

The plot is unrealistic, but the writer managed to create a convincing world of imagination, suitable for children, giving them an example of imagination.

The story begins in the real world at the river shore, where Alice's sister reads a book while Alice is bored and sleepy. Besides the beginning, the ending is realistic as well, because the Alice's sister wakes her from her sleep. Alice is the only real character, alongside with the White Rabbit, while her sister encounters a role of the person who is only assisting in entering and leaving the fantasy world.

A lot of movies and theatrical adaptations are made using this book as an inspiration, where Wonderland is a place of dreams becoming reality, and fantasy is present in every day. The author made everything possible after Alice fell down the rabbit hole, taking her readers with her in making the impossible real. This novel triggers the children's imagination, and the author of the two-dimensional world conjured up the transition from reality to unreality, while leaving readers interested, excited and impatient.